[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Well,
welcome to Beyond Belief.
Ben Stewart is with us,
a researcher, filmmaker,
and host of the incredible
Gaia Psychedelics Show.
He is currently
researching DMT, which
is a natural psychedelic
found in the human brain
and in nature.
It's recognized by both ancient
traditions and modern science.
It is linked to healing
trauma, provides
spiritual growth, and access
to transcendent realms
and entities.
Welcome back, Ben.
How have you been?
>>BEN STEWART: I've
been so good, George.
Having babies,
doing the dad life,
but also researching a
lot, especially about
these topics about
expansion of consciousness.
>>NOORY: How many
babies now for Ben?
>>STEWART: Well, a
five-month-old at home.
And then there's three
more on top of that,
ranging all the way
up to 9 years old.
>>NOORY: Good for you.
>>STEWART: Yeah,
they're teachers.
>>NOORY: Good for you.
They're going to
take after Daddy.
>>STEWART: I hope.
>>NOORY: DMT, what does it do?
>>STEWART: So DMT, it's
short for dimethyltryptamine.
And it is a psychedelic.
And anyone who has heard
the term psychedelic
but hasn't used it
before, you need
to understand that they're
all classified as drugs.
But psychedelics are vastly
different than other drugs
like deliriants, dissociatives,
things like alcohol,
methamphetamines,
the opiate class.
So psychedelics are very
different because they don't
just alter or distort reality.
They seem to open
up consciousness
and the doors of perception
so we can see more.
But DMT is the most common
because it's found in nature,
but it's just as different from
all the rest of the psychedelics
as psychedelics are
from all other drugs.
And there's very many
reasons for that.
It's very short acting.
Many psychedelics they last up
to anywhere from 5 to 12 hours.
DMT lasts maybe 5 to 10 minutes.
And when you're back,
there's no weirdness.
You don't have to get
your legs back under you.
You're just back.
It metabolizes really
well inside the body.
And it gives probably
the craziest, most potent
psychedelic experience
out of all of them.
So they call it the King
of the psychedelics.
And to explain
it, if people want
to know what the sensation
is, is within seconds,
let's say you smoke it,
within seconds, there's
this acceleration.
You feel like you're shot
out of a cosmic cannon.
You're not here in
your body anymore.
And there's this really wild,
kaleidoscopic acceleration
feeling that you go through.
>>NOORY: Ben, DMT is natural
in the brain, which you're
going to talk about in
a minute, but it's also
prevalent in nature.
Where?
>>STEWART: Well, it's
in a lot of grasses,
a lot of plants,
the acacia tree.
It's in all mammalian
cortices, which is wild.
>>NOORY: What are they?
>>STEWART: Well,
the mammals that
have the cortices and
the mammalian and also
in humans in the
neocortex, we produce DMT.
So not only is it the wildest
psychedelic that we know of,
it's very fast acting, but our
brain is producing it almost
around the clock.
And that's one of
the leading studies
that we've found out of
the University of Michigan,
is that we're always
producing DMT.
>>NOORY: What are
we producing it for?
What's its purpose
in the human body?
>>STEWART: We don't know.
Which is why there needs to
be a lot more study on this.
And I think the studies need
to be asking deeper questions
than how can we turn this
into a drug and make billions.
I think we really
need to be asking,
why is DMT in all mammals?
Why when you upregulate
DMT, does it take you
to this vastly different place.
It takes you to
a different place
than all of the other
psychedelics as well.
So if you think about a
key, every psychedelic,
they fit into the 5-HT2A
receptors in the brain as part
of the serotonergic pathway.
But DMT fits with a
specific affinity.
So the specificity
of that key takes us
to a vastly different place than
all these other psychedelics.
Why is it in the human brain?
The leading scientists
studying DMT still don't know.
All we know is
that we produce it.
And in 2019, they found
out that we don't just
produce trace amounts of it.
And it's probably not
even in the pineal gland.
It may produce it,
but it turns out
in the corpus callosum that
produces cerebrospinal fluid.
We're producing--
and this is in 2019,
we're producing almost as
much DMT around the clock
as we are serotonin,
dopamine, and norepinephrine.
>>NOORY: That's huge.
>>STEWART: Those are
functional neurotransmitters.
We know their purpose.
And then there was this other
study that just came out
last year that
says, we're actually
producing twice
the amount of DMT
than any of the other
neurotransmitters in the brain,
and we still don't know why.
>>NOORY: Does the human
body when it manufactures it
in the brain use it?
>>STEWART: It does.
And we metabolize it.
And tryptophan is
a precursor to it.
There's a couple other
precursors to it as well.
It's very hard to
study it because it
metabolizes so quickly.
So we could be
producing a lot of it.
But by the time we
get a sample of it,
while we're getting that
sample, it's still metabolizing.
So when we study how much
we actually have of it,
it might have been
twice that amount.
It started metabolizing
while it was
being prepared to be
viewed under a microscope.
So we don't know exactly why.
There are some suggestions.
Rick Strassman, he's the one
who broke through the Controlled
Substance Act.
He made DMT: The
spirit Molecule.
He initially started
saying things
like, everyone that came
back from a high dose of DMT
was saying, that felt more
real than this reality.
And the only thing-- there's
two things that that could mean.
That the DMT space is a more
base layer of our reality,
or it could mean that while
oxytocin, serotonin, dopamine,
norepinephrine, they all
give us a feeling state.
Perhaps DMT, no matter
how wild the experience
that we're experiencing,
it feels very familiar
because perhaps DMT gives us
the feeling of familiarity.
So we're not really
sure what DMT
is saying about how
we perceive reality,
but it has to be a part
of how we perceive reality
because we're all--
everyone listening to this is on
a relatively high amount of DMT
at all times.
>>NOORY: Where does the
DMT psychedelic experience
take us then?
>>STEWART: I wish I
knew how to answer that.
There are so many questions
that are unanswered.
And I think we're finally
getting to the point
where scientific
studies are starting
to ask the more pertinent
questions like this.
Where does the DMT drug
take consciousness.
Is it somewhere else.
Is it just a distortion
of our psyche.
We don't know.
But I will say,
when I said that DMT
is vastly different than
all other psychedelics,
it truly is because on
people meet their ancestors.
They meet beings, people from
their family that has passed.
On DMT, you're taken to
a very specific place,
and only if you
take enough of it.
And if you take
enough of it, you
may be presented with a door.
And if you don't
take enough, you're
not allowed through that door.
So it's kind of like--
>>NOORY: What if
you take too much.
>>STEWART: Well, I
don't know because there
are people who have taken
an exceedingly high dose,
and what they say is the
only thing that happens
is they blast through this door.
And once they do that,
all of that intensity
and that acceleration
that I was explaining,
that seems to subside and
give way to another world.
Now, this world isn't just like
a dream state where everything's
amorphous and changing.
It's structured.
It's fixed.
It almost seems like
you could map it out
if you had enough time,
but it's also inhabited.
So it's not just
a virtual reality.
It's inhabited by beings.
And there are certain
kinds of beings.
There are thousands of trip
reports, and a lot of them
are saying, I met this kind of
a being, like a mantis being
or a light being.
And when they lay it out,
to such a specific degree
that if two people were to meet
you and then go report back
what it was like meeting you,
that's how similar it is to say
I met this mantis being.
People are coming back and
reporting what they look like,
what their demeanor is
like, enough to where we
have characteristics for them.
So the DMT molecule takes our
consciousness to a doorway.
And if we take enough, we
go through the doorway.
So it's like a rite of
passage because it's scary.
Most people stop.
They don't go any further
because it's already scary.
Your heart is pounding.
But if you do more, like
Terence McKenna said,
just when you think
it's too much,
that's when you should do a
little bit more or a lot more,
and all of a sudden
you are transported
into a different realm.
Another dimension maybe
inhabited by other beings?
We just don't know.
But there are enough
anecdotal cases
that are so specific
to this space
that Imperial College London,
Johns Hopkins University,
as well as Medicinal Mindfulness
right here in Boulder, Colorado,
they are putting a lot of money
into just trying to figure out
where does it take you.
Are these beings actually real?
And because they seem to
be so vastly intelligent,
could they teach us something.
>>NOORY: Are you alert
when you're taking it,
or are you in more
like a dream state?
>>STEWART: When you take it,
there's the ramp up period.
And that ramp up can bring
you all the way to this door.
And if you don't take enough,
you're rejected at the door,
and then it just starts to
taper off until you're back.
If you get past the door, you
may be aware of your body.
You may be aware that
you still have a body.
There's a bit of your sense.
You still have consciousness
enough to say that I am here,
I am me, I'm on a
drug called DMT.
But a lot of that you
don't even have time for.
And some of the beings,
this is another thing
Terence McKenna said, don't
abandon yourself to amazement.
Meaning, go in with questions.
Don't just be so
awestruck that you just
sit there with your jaw open.
There are intelligent beings
inhabiting this space.
Ask some questions,
because if you do come back
with vastly more
intelligent information
than you had going in, that
could mean that these are,
let's say, alien beings or
other dimensional beings.
I don't know the truth to
that, but what I do know
is that when Imperial College
London, Johns Hopkins,
and other major universities
are asking these questions, that
means that they'll
admit, we don't
know what the base
layer of reality is,
and DMT might give
us a glimpse of that.
>>NOORY: Is it unusual,
then, that people
who experience under DMT all
have this familiar experience?
>>STEWART: Yeah.
The familiar-- Well, the
familiarity of the DMT space,
we also don't know why.
Like I said, it could be
that DMT just gives us
a sense of familiarity
no matter where we're at.
Which poses a question, is that
why it's in our brain right now?
Would this reality--
this what we
call our sober waking reality,
would this seem alien to us
without the presence
of DMT in us?
We don't know.
And what we do
know is that we're
breeding to ask that question.
Some universities have already
bred mice with a knockout gene,
meaning the fundamental
precursors to DMT are being
knocked out so they
don't synthesize it,
meaning those mice
cannot produce DMT.
And so we're just starting to
study, and I mean, poor mice.
But we're starting to study.
What does that do to their
perspective of reality.
Do they start
rejecting this reality
as not being real enough.
So we don't know why
does DMT, that space,
feel so wild when we talk about
it, but it feels so familiar?
I wish we had those answers.
But I don't think we're far
from answering those things as
long as we start funding science
that actually asks the deeper
questions about reality, not
just trying to make medicines
that can come to scale.
>>NOORY: Is it a protective
mechanism within the body?
Perhaps it gives you
some ability to cope.
>>STEWART: So one of Rick
Strassman's original theories,
and we do know that
it's a neuroprotectant.
So in anemic or low
oxygen environments,
say, you're drowning or you
have an accident or your heart
stops for any reason
and you stop breathing.
In that low oxygen
environment, DMT increases.
And I think in the
dying brain of mammals,
DMT increases up to 600%.
That's a lot.
The reason for
that could be just
to protect your neurons to
the very last second, just
in case you can
somehow resuscitate.
But the only thing--
I don't know if that's the only
reason why DMT is in the body.
I don't think that it's just a
byproduct that DMT transports us
to a very futuristic
virtual reality with highly
intelligent beings in
there, just because that's
a byproduct of a neuroprotectant
in a low oxygen environment.
I don't think God would just
have that as a byproduct.
For me, I think that that is
the neuroprotectant nature of it
is a byproduct that we
know that people who
have near-death experiences,
their heart has stopped,
their breathing has
stopped, but they're still
experiencing something.
They float up above their body.
They can see omnidirectionally.
They can hear in
different languages
and understand the languages
that they're hearing.
So there's some
transcended intelligence
that they're stepping into.
DMT may play a role in--
like I said, being a key.
It gets us into that space.
And that space is closed
off to most humans
so we can operate in the
mundane world, if you will.
Because if we were
always in the DMT space,
we probably wouldn't
get much done.
>>NOORY: I guess that we all
know Dannion Brinkley has had
three near-death experiences.
Might he be tapping
into his body DMT,
creating more of
these experiences.
>>STEWART: We think.
And when I say I mean, the
greater scientific field
and the people who are looking
at DMT and what does it mean.
How is it connected to NDEs,
near-death experiences or OBEs,
out of body experiences.
And to me, the best
of my understanding
is the difference
between an NDE and an OBE
is a near-death
experience is what prompts
you to come out of your body.
And there's specific things
that happen in that state
that don't happen when you
astral travel or lucid dream,
and that is that you see tunnels
of light, kaleidoscopic tunnels
of light, and you
meet ancestors.
A lot of people who--
I think it was in the
1960s, they came up with
the defibrillator.
That was the first time when
people went into cardiac arrest.
By that point, once they brought
this technology to scale,
they were bringing people
back from the brink of--
>>NOORY: Of the death?
>>STEWART: --death.
Exactly.
And then the stories
started flooding in.
Everyone was saying, well,
there was this tunnel of light,
and I was being magnetized or
drawn into this warm, beautiful,
whatever that destination
is at the end of that light.
And there are
ancestors and beings
that are guiding me there.
Some people with
near-death experiences
said that they're
transported to a hell realm,
and it becomes really scary, but
that they don't feel any pain
when they're out of their body.
But when they come
back into their body,
that's when they feel the pain
of whatever the accident was.
So in these near-death
experiences,
I do believe that we're
accessing a little bit closer
to source, and that
information makes
so much sense in these spaces.
And this is very
similar to psychedelics.
People say, I get it.
Reality is simple.
It's so brilliant
and it's so simple.
It's not complex or complicated.
But then when you come
back into your body,
for some reason, those wise
little kernels of wisdom
that we get, they fade.
We don't know how to
put them into words.
They remain ineffable.
So it's something that
we can bring back,
but we don't know how to share
that wisdom that we accessed
with other people around
us, other than saying there
is something beyond death.
Life keeps going,
consciousness keeps going.
And I think that's
what the ancients even
knew about all psychedelics.
And that's why they
said psychedelics are
like a mini death experience.
You get to experience death
without your body physically
dying.
>>NOORY: Interesting.
Wim Hof has various
breathing techniques
in cold water with psychedelics.
Does his technique have
anything to do with this?
>>STEWART: He says it does.
Wim Hof has a method--
so he has many different
kinds of breathing.
He has the introductory.
And then there's
an advanced kind.
And that advanced kind it's
a lot more incapacitating
because it probably does
upregulate the natural DMT
inside the body.
It is interesting.
I don't know if
there's a correlate,
but your lungs
produce DMT as well.
It turns out your
eyes produce DMT.
And DMT is found in your blood.
It's found in your urine.
We're not sure why, but it's
all throughout the body.
It's in the cerebrospinal fluid.
And Wim Hof's
method of breathing,
we do know that respiration
influences the fluctuations
of cerebrospinal fluid.
It can possibly mean
that we upregulate
DMT with a breathing method.
>>NOORY: It generates the
production, you're saying.
>>STEWART: Yeah, it
upregulates the amount of DMT
that we're producing
at any given time.
And I'm not sure
exactly why that
is, because it seems like
in low oxygen environments
when your heart has
stopped, DMT skyrockets.
And then in hyper
oxygen environments,
when you're doing
a breath practice,
and your blood is
becoming hyper oxygenated,
it seems like you go into
the DMT space as well.
Those things they
seem contradictory,
but perhaps they're not.
It seems like when we deviate
from baseline, whether it
be baseline oxygen or just
baseline consciousness,
we're entering the DMT space.
So people like Wim Hof
and the understanding
that Wim Hof is really just
repackaging old breathing
techniques of Tummo Tibetan
breathing techniques,
he just repackaged it
to show you listen,
this is for people
who are trying
to find God on a mountaintop.
You can face freezing
cold water or you
can climb Mount Kilimanjaro
in your underwear
by breathing and visualizing
that you are powerful enough
to rise to this occasion.
DMT likely plays
some role in that,
and it also probably allows us
to feel familiar with stress.
Whereas most of us, the
difference between stress,
which is the number one
killer, and eustress, which
is what you experience when you
do a marathon or you work out
and that's good for
you, the only difference
is the story in your head.
The effort on the body
is the exact same,
but it's the story in your head.
So there's something
about DMT that
might cause you to
feel more meaningfully
connected to the story of rising
to the occasion of whatever life
throws at you.
So DMT might actually push
you into your higher potential
as well.
>>NOORY: What is DMT verse?
What has that been?
>>STEWART: That is
a colloquial term
that is used by
people who are also
into talking about technology,
like the metaverse.
And the metaverse is a
technological virtual realm,
largely built in-- people
like Silicon Valley who
are trying to bring people who
use technology, social media,
but bring them into spaces
that are virtual spaces.
>>NOORY: I mean,
Zuckerberg gets that.
>>STEWART: Yes.
And that's exactly why he named
Facebook Meta after a while.
So then the DMT verse is a term
to explain the very structured
reality of DMT because--
I can't stress this enough.
DMT does not just blast you
into an anomaly in an evolving
weird space.
It's structured.
It's reproducible.
A lot of people come back
with the same exact stories.
Now, I've experienced it
and it does feel structured.
And if you zoom
in, in fact, I had
to do a technological
thing which
is on your phone, where you
pinch out to start zooming in
with this infinite scroll.
And the more I
pinched out, I started
seeing the deeper detail of
the structured code of reality.
And there were little mice
with hats for some reason,
building the infrastructure
of this DMT verse.
>>NOORY: In your mind.
>>STEWART: If that was
my mind, maybe my mind
stepped out of this body
and into the DMT verse.
The thing is, is I think reality
is a lot stranger than most
people give it credit for.
And I think for feelings of
safety, the scientific community
out there, they say,
whoa, let's just
assume that reality
is reductionist.
There's antecedent causation,
meaning the only thing
that causes what happens today
is what happened yesterday.
That's a safe feeling,
because then we
get the feeling that we know
how to understand and thereby
control reality.
I think what's
happening in science now
is we're starting
to realize most
of our fundamental assumptions
of what reality is are false.
So what does DMT teaching us?
That this space of DMT might
be yet another simulation,
whereas baseline sober
reality might just
be another simulation as well.
>>NOORY: Is DMT a reality?
>>STEWART: It might be a key
into an experiential field
of reality.
My personal take
on reality is that
the current scientific community
says reality is a fact.
But reality cannot be seen as
a fact because there's nothing
outside of it that we know that
can reference it or measure it.
So we can't actually
say with any certainty
that reality is a fact.
Reality seems to be
more like a story.
It unfolds through a
sequence of events,
and there are stories
nested within stories.
DMT seems to be a
key that brings us
into a vastly more structured
and inhabited place
with intelligent beings
than here, because we
call this mundane.
Perhaps if we spent more
time in the DMT space,
we would feel that
that's mundane.
But that's why there are these
new studies out of Imperial
College London that
are bringing people
into the DMT space for longer
periods of time to do what?
To study if this space
is actually real.
Because we don't know yet,
we don't have enough evidence
to say that it's just a
distortion of our mind,
because we don't have a
working model of the mind
that's foolproof.
>>NOORY: Why aren't
they studying this
after all these years?
>>STEWART: Well--
>>NOORY: Why not?
>>STEWART: --I think
the main reason
is because the scientific
community is driven by money.
And those who know how to
generate or propagate money
to study things, they
want to know what
they're going to get out of it.
If they're going to throw
millions of dollars at studying
DMT, the people who have
historically put money
into scientific studies that
would cost millions of dollars,
they want to know, is there a
product that I can sell that I
can make all that money
back plus 10x, 20x, 30x.
And I think we're getting to the
place where some of my friends,
I'll keep them
unnamed, but they're
putting large amounts of
money into DMT studies.
And they're privately
funding it with no hope
of a return on investment,
simply because they
want to ask the deeper
questions that scientists
should be asking.
And that is, what is the
fundamental nature of reality.
>>NOORY: That's unusual for
them to do that, isn't it?
>>STEWART: For these
private investors, no,
because I think for the science
community, yes because, again,
they want the
feeling of control.
How can I make sure
I make more money
after the experiment is done.
But these private investors that
are worth hundreds of millions
of dollars, they'll put a couple
million dollars into a study,
whether their name
is on it or not.
Sometimes their
name's not even on it,
but they just want
to ask the questions,
and they want reputable
scientific institutions
to ask these questions,
too, because Rick Strassman,
we have Stuart Hameroff,
John Chavez from DMT quest,
whom I've worked with, these are
people who are like, let's just
see how much money we can
scoop together and start asking
real questions and get
science back on board with not
the agenda of how
can we make money,
but how can we
understand ourselves
and our place in the universe.
>>NOORY: Ben, what is
extended state DMT?
>>STEWART: That is what has been
going on for a couple of years
at Imperial College London.
So, as the name should
suggest, as I said,
DMT take 5 to 10
minutes and you're back.
And you're so back that you
don't feel weird anymore,
other than the
fact that you just
had the craziest experience.
>>NOORY: But you're
normal when you come back?
>>STEWART: 100%.
They call it the
lunch man's high
because you could do it on your
lunch break and you're not--
there's no recovery
period afterwards.
Once you're back, you're back.
But beyond that,
the state of DMT
lasts a very short
amount of time.
And this was very maddening to
people who got past that door
that I mentioned into that
structured reality that's
inhabited by highly
intelligent beings.
Imagine coming face to face
with some of the most highly
intelligent beings,
and then by the time
you realize, oh, I
should ask a question,
you're being ripped
back out of that room
because the DMT is wearing off.
Extended state DMT is
intravenously infusing you
with a high amount of DMT to
keep you inside that room,
basically so you can ask
these beings questions,
and you can come back with
information about the space
and the beings inside the space.
>>NOORY: It's fascinating.
>>STEWART: It's, I think,
the most fascinating thing
in science right now,
because it's really--
psychedelics are very
fascinating, but DMT,
specifically, the fact that our
brain produces it all the time,
we should know why
it's in our brain.
We should know what happens
when we massively upregulate it,
and why.
We should know why it brings
us to this very same room
every single time that DMT in
ayahuasca doesn't take us to.
There's DMT in ayahuasca,
but then there's
also other alkaloids, and it
doesn't take us to this room.
There was yopo, way back in
the day in South America,
there was this green snuff.
They would insufflate
it up their nose,
and they would have
a DMT experience.
But that's very intense.
But it doesn't take
you to this same room.
So intravenously
or smoked seemed
to be the two ways
of imbibing DMT
that brings you to this room.
And that's the very thing
that Imperial College London,
Johns Hopkins University,
Medicinal Mindfulness, and DMT
quest and my friend
Danny Goler, are really
interested asking about
N, N-Dimethyltryptamine.
What is this room?
How do we study it.
Are these beings real.
Where do they go when we're
not on high amounts of DMT?
Are they still right around us?
Do they care that we're here?
Do they care that we're in
their space when we go there?
Because some of them
are not so nice.
Some of them are
like tricksters.
Some of them are curious
about why we're there
and that we see them like,
oh, wow, you finally see us.
Some of them, they
want to mess with us.
So these aren't just angelic
beings or demonic beings.
It's not just two different
sides of the polarity.
It's almost like humans.
They have temperaments.
And sometimes they're curious.
Sometimes they're just
annoyed by our presence.
>>NOORY: How many different
entities are there, three?
>>STEWART: There are several.
It's hard to really
say there's only 3,
but there are three
main archetypes that--
thanks to the
internet, which is odd
because Rick Strassman
studies started right
around the rise of the internet.
And when Rick Strassman studies
about DMT started coming out,
people started taking DMT
and using the internet
to report their findings of
this space that they go to.
And so when they
go into this space,
they report meeting these
beings, and some of them
are elves.
Now they call them clockwork
elves or machine elves
because they're not biological.
Parts of them look biological,
but then other parts of them
look technological, like machine
or synthetic or crystalline.
And we don't exactly know why.
But the elves are
like tricksters.
They're playful.
Sometimes they like
messing with you
like a friend that likes
pushing your buttons.
>>NOORY: Does everybody
report seeing the same thing?
>>STEWART: Sometimes.
They report seeing--
>>NOORY: That's weird.
>>STEWART: --elves.
And elves like beings.
And when thousands of people
online were reporting,
yeah, I saw elves.
I saw elves, too.
Were they about this big?
Yeah, roughly.
And did they have weird bodies.
Were they tinkering?
Were they building technologies?
Crystalline mechanical
technologies?
Yeah.
OK.
Now we have to ask
some deeper questions.
Why are there elves
in this space?
Why are there like tricksters?
Why do they have a
specific demeanor
that you can report
back, and thousands
of people who never
met one another
are saying the same things.
There's mantid beings, so they
have bodies like praying mantis.
There are thousands of
times bigger than however
big you are in that space.
They have iridescent
colors to them.
They're very calm.
They can be menacing
because of their size
and their vast
intelligence, but they
seem to just be observant like
they are ancient intelligences
of the universe.
I have some personal stories
of encountering them.
And the interesting thing is
they will answer questions--
for me, this was my experience,
if you ask your questions
wisely, if you're just asking
a dumb question that you could
ask anybody back here
in sober reality,
they'll just remain silent.
But if you can really formulate
a meaningful, valuable question,
then they'll answer you.
That's fascinating.
And then there's
also light beings.
>>NOORY: The whole thing is.
I want to get into your
stories in a moment,
but we have a brief
clip that looks
at some of the artistic
representations
of these entities.
Let's take a look.
[BACKGROUND MUSIC]
Ben, that's incredible.
>>STEWART: That
was done with AI.
And what's fascinating
about that is AI
seems to understand how to
make visual representations
of the DMT space better
than most artists.
Not all artists, but
better than most.
Terence McKenna thought that
the psychedelics of the future
would be more like computers,
and that the computers
of the future would be
more like psychedelics.
And I found that fascinating.
That was really beautiful.
>>NOORY: It was well done.
But do people see those
creatures most of the time?
>>STEWART: Almost every time
that you get past that door,
you enter an inhabited
structured space.
>>NOORY: With one of
those things we just saw?
>>STEWART: Something like that.
So the first thing you
saw were these elves,
and there was like mechanical
gears moving around.
It boggles the mind, but
they're highly intelligent.
Some people-- I have friends
that say that AI of the future
might have created
spaces that we can access
on DMT, because there's
also this other theory
that time is less relevant when
you get beyond this reality.
So you can experience the
past, the present, the future
as a simultaneous reality.
So some of what we're seeing
there, some of these beings,
they may not be present yet
in our conception of time.
But these elves, they have
those gears moving around.
That was a really
interesting representation.
And then the other ones
were the mantid beings.
I think one of the
funniest things
that I saw there was
one of those praying
mantis beings was working like a
DJ booth or something like that.
Those are the weird things that
people see in the DMT space.
>>NOORY: DJ Mantis.
>>STEWART: Right.
Exactly.
Why are people seeing praying
mantises from Burning Man.
They're seeing things
that they can relate to.
And why are these elves
tinkering with technology?
Why aren't they just purely
curious about who we are?
Because all other
psychedelics, they
can introduce you to ancestors.
But those ancestors often
seem to be present with us.
Whereas these beings in
the DMT space, sometimes
they're not even
interested in us.
Sometimes they're
annoyed that we're there.
Sometimes they're just like,
yeah, whatever, come follow me.
I followed a mouse one
time, and, in fact,
there was many mice.
And then they all turned into
the same big mouse with the hat.
And it just stared
me up and down
and said, OK, and took off
running as if I should chase it.
And my body was sitting at
the time, so all I had to do
was lean forward and I started
floating towards this mouse.
And it very much so was like
this very digital infinite zoom
where I'm going into the
space and you can keep zooming
and there's more detail and
more detail and more detail.
And I was getting to the
substructure of reality,
but it felt cartoonish.
It felt CGI.
So I'm personally not
sure what to make of it.
But these beings, the
light beings that you saw,
they're completely
made of light.
They have this childish nature,
not childish, childlike nature,
I should say.
They're very pure.
They're innocent.
They're compassionate.
They're filled with love.
The mantid beings, they're calm.
They're wise.
But they can be very ominous.
And intimidating.
The elves can be
like tricksters.
And there are other
beings that go from scary
all the way to awe inspiring.
The only thing is,
we don't know why.
And we don't know why DMT out
of all the other psychedelics
brings you to the same space
and introduces you to--
it seems like the same beings
over and over and over again,
whereas other psychedelics,
they will introduce you
to an ancestor.
But somebody sitting right next
to you on the same psychedelic
will not see that ancestor.
They'll experience something
completely different.
So why does DMT take you
to a reproducible space?
That's why science needs
to get involved in this.
>>NOORY: Have you ever had a
situation where you come out
of a DMT experience and you go,
I don't want to do that anymore.
>>STEWART: Almost every time.
And many psychedelics
can do that.
I think the reason for that is
it's not for the faint of heart.
If you want the wisdom
of the universe,
there's a rite of
passage involved.
So all ancestor
shamanic cultures,
they would send their
children as they
were going through
puberty before they
became men and women.
They would send
their children off
to do something dangerous
that took some real moxie.
It took some real might
for them to overcome
their own internal fear,
to experience something
beyond their fear.
And that's what it means
to step into your own.
But the psychedelic space
is this isn't your culture.
This isn't your
parents saying, go off
into the wilderness
for a little bit
and then report back
after a couple of weeks.
This is-- I'm already
on a high amount of DMT,
and the person sitting
right next to me is saying,
is it really, really intense.
Yes, this is the most intense
thing I've ever experienced.
OK.
Take one more gigantic
hit, and you'll probably
blast through that
door and you'll
experience something
that you aren't currently
experiencing now.
Yes, most people come back and
they say, that was so scary.
I don't know if I
want to do it again.
But most people will say,
after a little while,
after they've integrated the
experience, I'm glad I did it.
Even if I never do it
again, I'm glad I did it
because I witnessed what's
beyond the veil of reality.
And once you do that,
you're a changed person.
I've never met anybody
who's done psychedelics
without becoming
a changed person.
I do want to introduce the
caveat that when you're
taking psychedelics,
not just producing it
inside yourself like Wim
Hof, you need to be careful.
And I think there's far too
many people that just think,
oh, I saw it online, so I'll
just do a massive amount of DMT.
And they're forgetting that
for tens of thousands of years,
shamanic cultures
held a safe container.
There was somebody looking
after your physical body
while you're journeying
in the astral.
>>NOORY: So something
could happen to you?
>>STEWART: Yes.
And same thing with
any rite of passage.
It's dangerous.
Psychedelics are dangerous.
If you have a precondition
for schizophrenia,
psychosis of any kind, if
you're just not in that strong--
>>NOORY: If you a heart ailment.
>>STEWART: Anything, any
precondition whatsoever,
it can push you over the edge
because your psychology runs
through your genetics.
It runs through
your entire body.
So you need to know
what you're doing.
It's not for the faint of heart.
It's not just for anybody.
But for those who are
willing and equipped to say,
yes, I choose to do it the
safe and responsible way,
but I want to go far beyond
where any human has ever
gone before.
Those are the people that now
science is calling upon saying,
come volunteer, we're
going to put you
on a massive amount of this
for a long period of time,
and we're going to
study what that is.
Extended state DMT
is one of them.
And John Chavez from
DMT quest is really
studying why does
our brain produce it.
And what questions
they're asking
is, can you come back with
information about that space.
So really these
scientists are signing up
these adventurous pioneers
to go into this space that's
scary to get to just like
all pioneers have always
had to experience.
And to keep their
bearings about them,
not just go there and lose
themselves to their amazement,
but to really ask questions,
to study it, and then
come back and recall what you
experienced in that space,
so we can start building a model
here of what there actually is.
>>NOORY: Is anybody
else studying this?
>>STEWART: All I know is
Imperial College London has done
studies for a couple of years.
And they still haven't actually
brought the science out,
because I don't think they
know what it even means.
It's starting to shake
the foundation of all
of what we say reality is.
>>NOORY: Is it scaring them?
The results?
>>STEWART: You know who
I think it's scaring,
is the powers that be, if
I were to use that term.
Because the powers
that be have always--
it doesn't matter if
it's the pharaohs of old
or the Wall Street
of present day.
They like to know
what motivates people
to behave in a certain way.
If they know what causes
people to behave a certain way,
then they feel like they
can control the masses.
And to me, that's
what government
has almost always largely done.
It keeps you safe, but it
also controls your behavior.
And the reason why
psychedelics for 20 years
was illegal to study at all,
even for science to study it,
which is very odd, it's one
of the most powerful things
out there for consciousness
and the study of consciousness.
But we weren't allowed
to study it for 20 years.
Why?
Because I think private
interests were studying
it to see how can we
make sure that this
doesn't cause people to
want to step out of society
and say no to our authority.
How can we use the
very same drugs
to make sure that they
stay in our society?
And this is the idea
of introducing people
into a matrix, a
simulation, if you will,
where you believe that
the reality you're in
is the only reality
available to you.
That's what DMT and
these other psychedelics
are doing is showing
us, wait a minute,
reality is far more vast
than this sober reality.
So what's out there?
The powers that
be they're scared
that if average people start
accessing these states,
it's like another country
coming up with a new weapon.
They want to be
able to control it.
They want to be able
to keep it secret.
They want to be able to have
that power for themselves.
So yes, I think
it scares people.
But the scientists, the
whole job of science
is to know why we're here.
To know who we are.
To know what our purpose is.
We need to be asking
these questions.
Otherwise, the science
institutions are a farce.
>>NOORY: You're talking
about the New World Order.
>>STEWART: For lack
of a better term,
it's the New World
Order, for sure.
And where the New World Order,
if I were to use that term,
is moving us is into a
technologically driven society
that is like a Skinner's box.
And BF Skinner was a
behavioral psychologist,
and he found that through
invisible levers of control,
you can change the
behavior of mammals
with reward schedules
and punishment schedules.
And that's technically
what the internet is.
There's a book, Technofeudalism
by Mark Gaffney,
who shows there's 23 distinct
corollaries between BF Skinner's
work in conditioning
mammals invisibly
to their understanding.
And the internet, slot machines,
and scrolling on social media,
it's the same psychology to
make our behaviors compulsory.
So we don't know
why we're doing it.
We're just looking
for our reward.
That is the matrix.
It's just not being in a vat
of goo hooked up to mechanisms.
It's not understanding that
the internet is intelligent.
And it also has
an agenda to keep
our attention focused on a
very small window of reality.
That's what the powers that
be or the New World order
have always been trying to do.
Keep us from seeing
our own power.
So the real journey, the
real goal of science,
is to know the self and to
understand how powerful we are.
That to me is the most scary
thing to the New World Order,
is us waking up to our power.
>>NOORY: If I told
you I do not want
to try DMT because I'm
concerned about what
I might experience, my health,
would you say I'm off base?
>>STEWART: No, I would say
if you weren't scared at all,
I would say you're off base.
You should feel trepidation of
stepping into a universe where
everyone's saying it's going to
be scary, but you'll survive.
It's like jumping
off a diving board.
Everyone's telling you,
you're going to survive.
>>NOORY: Altered states.
>>STEWART: Right, and when you
stare into that 40 foot cliff
and you know that
water is there,
you've seen other
people jumping,
you know you can survive it, but
something inside your body is
saying don't.
That's a healthy
mechanism to have.
So if you George, were
telling me, I have no fear,
I just want to go as far
as I can, then I would say,
something's off.
We need to check whether you are
a fit for this journey or not.
I think having
healthy fear is not
just the sign of you having
all your screws tightened.
I think what it also
shows you is that you are
willing to overcome yourself.
You're willing to overcome
your own obstacles
and still peer beyond the
veil, which is very scary.
So I do not think psychedelics
are for everybody.
Like I said, we're all on
psychedelics right now.
We all have DMT in our brain.
It's just not at
the loading dose
enough to get us to that
door that I keep mentioning.
>>NOORY: How do people
track your work, Ben?
>>STEWART: You need to go
to benjosephstewart.com,
and that's where you can find
all the films that I've done.
Almost every film that
I've done is free online,
because I really just
want to impact society
in the best way possible
to make the best choices,
not just for the individual, but
for the health of our species
and the planet
that we rely upon.
So go to benjosephstewart.com,
and you'll also
see that I'm making
a film course, which
is teaching other people how to
tell the most important stories
that are connected to
our soul, to move society
without an agenda,
without propaganda,
but simply to tell
the stories that
have real, universal
principles and values.
>>NOORY: Ben, Thanks for
being on Beyond Belief.
>>STEWART: It's so
much fun, George.
>>NOORY: So what would
you do if you tried DMT?
And what would you experience?
And would you really want
to come back and tell us?
Think about that.
Thanks for watching
Beyond Belief
[THEME MUSIC]